So as well as worrying about where
people are looking on the page,
we need to think about our
calls to action in particular.
These are obviously the most critical
element when it comes to the design of any
website and it's absolutely
essential we get them right.
The most essential part of
them is that people spot them.
We've already talked about the copy and
how we want to make them clear and
compelling and that kind of thing, but
if people don't see them all the great
copy in the world is useless.
Now, we can partly do that by drawing
people's attention using the techniques
we've already covered,
but there is more that we can do
when it comes to calls to action.
For a start, we can simplify the number
of calls to action we've had.
I touched on this in the last section,
but it is worth repeating.
So often on web sites, we have so
many different calls to action, so
many things that we want people to use,
and that can be really problematic.
Here is an agency website I just
happen to grab at random, and
they've got a ridiculous number of
calls to action going on there.
You've got sign up for our newsletter,
they've got send us a message,
get in touch, phone us, email us,
follow us on social media, chat with us.
All these different things vying for
attention.
The site is begging people
to contact them, isn't it?
But it's too much.
It's too much repetition, so
it creates noise on the page, and
it can lead to paralysis about when or
what do you want me to do sign up for
the newsletter or get in contact?
What do you want me to do here?
Be very clear.
So my rule of thumb, generally speaking,
is to have a primary action and
a secondary action, right?
So your primary action is
the main thing you wanna do, so
on an agency website like this
it would be get in touch, right,
ciz that's the primary thing we want
to do, get in touch and hire us.
But not everybody is going to be ready for
that, right, so
you also have a second reaction.
And your second reaction might be
sign up for a newsletter, okay?
So for those people that aren't ready yet
to commit,
we want to be able to keep in contact with
them until they are ready to commit, okay,
and that's where something
like a newsletter comes in.
So let's take, for example, Frontend
Masters that we were looking at earlier.
You have multiple calls to action
that were very similar and
may be conflicting a little bit.
There was browse our courses,
there was view our,
I can't remember they were called,
paths or learning paths.
And then there was also join now, right?
And all of those really are kind
of almost primary calls to action.
So really perhaps your action there,
your primary action on your homepage
would be browse our courses.
Then when people are viewing the courses,
that's when you come in and say now join.
But on the homepage we might want to
introduce a secondary call to action for
somebody who's not ready to join yet,
but liked what they saw,
which would be something like, sign up to
tips and advice on front end development.
And they get an email once every month or
something, just reminding
them that the site exists and providing
them with a little bit value as well,
to the point where people are ready
to actually subscribe and join.
So having that kind of two-tier call
to action works extremely well.
The other thing I touched on, and
I touched on this with the Frontend
Masters course and also touched on it when
we were talking about Apple is the need
to have distinct calls to action.
That you know very clearly how
these two courses of action work.
So I was saying that browse courses and
browse learning paths are quite similar.
It's not going to be obvious,
the difference.
Here's the probably the most comical
example I've ever found of that,
having two calls to action buttons
that were extremely similar.
This was on Amazon's iOS app for
a long long time if you tried to buy
an product that wasn't yet released,
you were given two options, preorder
this item today and preorder it now.
Now, you tell me, do you know what
the difference between those two are?
Absolutely not.
Now, turns out, one of them added it to
your basket and then you could check out,
and the other one immediately
took you to check out.
Basically, what had happened there is
some developer had realized, normally,
they would have a button that says add
to basket, and one that says check out,
which is a more logical thing to do.
But when it got changed,
the developer just switched the text,
because it's a preorder, and
you end up with two buttons that
are very similar to one another.
Notice I'm blaming a developer.
It might not be a developer's fault, and
I apologize to developers everywhere, but
it tends to be that kind of scenario where
mistakes are made because the designer
hasn't thought it through properly.
So the developer has to
come up with something.
So that's a great example of where
things can go a little bit wrong.
And you can end up with two calls to
action that are not clearly distinct from
one another.
You can't talk about calls to action
without talking about this idea
of the fold.
Now, this is a really interesting one.
Because there's a lot of argument about
the fold within the design world, and
a lot of people say, well,
the fold doesn't exist.
The idea of a fold comes from the days
of newspapers where they fold
them in half and put them on the stand.
And so you'd always wanna have your
really compelling story on the top half,
which would be seen when
it was on the stand.
Now, people argue that on the web there is
no fold because everybody has a different
resolution or
the browser open at a different size, etc.
And that is true, there is no specific
point where the fold appears.
However, on everybody's browser,
whatever device you're using,
there is a point where you
have to start scrolling.
And so there is a general kind of view
that your call to action should be high
on the page as a result, so
it can't be missed if people don't scroll.
In truth,
it's a lot more complicated than that.
So unfortunately, I can't show you the
actual AB test I ran because of NDAs but
I've kind of mocked it up vaguely
to give you a sense of what we did.
So originally, in the original version,
they had a call to action
that was high on the page, but
it was on the right hand side.
And as I've already said, the right
hand side is not a great position for
calls to action because we tend
not to view that side as much and
we also associate it lot with advertising.
Advertising often is in
the right hand side.
So we decided to move it
to the main column and
lower down on the page,
in the left hand column.
And we saw a 304% increase in conversion,
right?
So even though it was lower on the page,
it tended to perform a lot better.
And this isn't just about
a positioning issue.
It's not just about that the left
hand side is better than the right.
It's also about picking your moment.
I think I might cover this again later.
But it's that there is a fundamental
problem that sometimes we go in for
the ask too quickly, right?
It's like when you go to those websites,
when you arrive on the website and
it instantly pops up with,
get 10% off your first order.
Right, and you go, well,
I haven't even seen any products yet,
I don't know if there's anything I like.
So you close the overlay immediately,
right.
Then you navigate around the site,
you find something you want, and
where's my 10% off.
And it's gone because the overlay's gone,
they picked the wrong moment
to ask you to sign up.
And we do this all the time
in calls to action.
So you've got to think about
an appropriate place on the page to put
the calls to action.
So although I do tend to have calls
to action high on the page for
returning users that have all
ready made up their mind.
Most of the time I will have
a call to action at least partway,
if not all the way down the content of
a page where people have had a chance
to see everything that I've got
to offer in that particular case.
So don't fixate on the fold overly, but
pick the right moment where you think
people have seen enough of the content
in order to make an educated decision.
And then it becomes a matter of ensuring
that people see that call to action at
that lower point on the page.
One of the methods you can use
that to do that is white space,
it's an incredibly powerful tool.
But unfortunately,
all the time, clients and
stakeholders like to fill up empty space.
But empty space is a very powerful tool
for drawing your attention to something.
So I'm sure you've experienced it before,
right?
You can be using your laptop
quite happily, right?
And everything's, fine screen looks great,
and then you come up with a white or
a black, empty page, right.
So your whole screen is white, and
you can see every little speck of dirt
suddenly on it because there's nothing
else to distract you from it, right?
It's all this white and
then a speck of just dirt.
And the reason I use that example right
now is because that's what I'm looking at
on my screen.
Excuse me, there we go.
So you will spot that speck of dirt.
That's the power of negative space, if you
leave a lot of space around something,
there's nothing else to hold the eye,
so the eye settles on
whatever is in the middle of that
empty space, such as a call to action.
So if you leave a lot of empty
space around a call to action,
people are much more likely to notice it.
There are other techniques
available to you as well,
to ensure people notice calls to action.
Color is an obvious one, so
color is a really powerful tool.
If you use a contrasting color
to the rest of the palette,
then it's going to jump out.
And if you think you're a bit rubbish
on color that'ss absolutely fine.
If you go to somewhere
like color.adobe.com and
you enter in the kind of default
color that your website is,
probably the corporate color you
are given, it will suggest contrasting
colors that you can use In order
to pop out your call to action.
Now, the only word of warning, and
I'm sure somebody very smug is typing
this into the chat as we speak,
is that something like 1 in 20 men and
1 in 200 women are colorblind.
Which means that we don't all
perceive color in the same way.
Even if you're not colorblind,
we see color slightly differently.
So as a result, you can't rely exclusively
on color in order to draw attention, but
it can be a useful secondary tool.
So as you can see here, there's quite
a lot of white space around that Shop Now
button as well as it being
a strong contrasting color.
So alongside color,
another technique that you can use,
because you can't rely solely on color,
is size, really.
And when it comes to calls to action,
bigger is better.
It's better because you're more
likely to spot it, which is good,
but it's got a secondary bonus, too,
which is it allows more room to
have a compelling call to action.
So if you notice on my previous examples,
it's things like Shop Now,
because I don't have a lot
of space to write anything.
And that's fine, but you've got to
remember that people are scanning the page
and reading things out of context.
So calls to action and things like links,
they are often read without
reading the surrounding copy.
And so a term like Shop Now, well, it
tells me that I should buy something, but
it doesn't really help me to
understand what I'm buying or
what's going on or
what benefit that's gonna provide.
It's like links where it says Read More or
Click Here,
it provides no real
information in its own right.
But if you make your call to action
bigger, you can add more to it,
you can say, for example, buy The Rift
today and become a better gamer, right?
That's a much more
compelling call to action.
Because a, it says what you're buying,
right, what you're gonna get, and
it's communicating the benefit
you get from that.
So bigger and
bolder not only makes it more visible,
it gives you more room to create
some compelling calls to action.
One quite popular way of drawing attention
to calls to action is animation.
So you can see on this example that
notice the Add to Bag button tethers to
the bottom as as the user scrolls,
so it is effectively animating.
Animation does work very well,
it does grab your attention, but
it has its downside.
And its downside is that,
as I'm sure you're already experiencing
as you're watching this now, it's quite
hard to pay attention to what I'm saying
with a looping animation going on.
The movement draws our our attention very,
very strongly, okay.
And so when you have a looping animation
like is going on at the moment,
it shoots up our cognitive load.
And so if you are gonna have an animation
on something like a call to action to
draw attention to it, I suggest that
when someone scrolls, you animate it as
it comes onto the screen,
you animate it then, right, and then stop.
So only animates based on a user
interaction and a user feedback.
Maybe when a user rolls over the button or
when it first comes into view or
that kind of thing.
Be very, very subtle and
understated when you use your animation.
And this is another reason why I'm gonna
hate on the the Frontend Masters website
a little bit more as well, because with
their call to action they had a great
solid value proposition, and a great
value proposition at the top of the page.
But underneath that,
they had a video background.
And video backgrounds have
become very popular now.
But they do increase cognitive load quite
a lot because you're trying to read text
that's over the top of a moving
background, and your eye is flicking
backwards and forwards between two and
it's quite distracting, it's quite hard.
Now, the reason I didn't comment on
that when we were looking at the site Is
because they had the foresight to stop
the video once it played through once.
So by the time I came to comment it,
it actually had stopped moving.
So that's preferable to the endless
loops of video animations.
But generally speaking, those video
backgrounds aren't a great idea.
They take a long time to load, and
they are a constant distraction,
like this animation that's
going in the corner of my
vision all the time I'm
trying to talk to you now.
So I will move on to the next page,
which has also got an animation on.
[LAUGH] But this is to demonstrate
a slightly different point, and
this is the idea of breaking complex
actions down into smaller tasks.
Because not all calls to action are as
simple as click a Shop Now button.
A lot of them are a lot more complicated,
again, if we go back to
the Frontend Masters example,
when we clicked on that Sign Up button,
we had to select the price,
the particular membership that we wanted.
And we then had quite a long form to fill
in that had multiple password fields, and
it also had credit card information
that had to be entered, and
those kinds of things.
When I'm faced with something that's
a little bit longer than like that,
I like to break it into
a series of smaller steps.
It goes back to the chunking that
I was talking about earlier,
to just allow the user
a little bit of time and
space to focus on one task at a time,
to reduce their cognitive load.
You see the same thing done
with customizing products,
like is happening with this bike here.
By making it not a massive
form of drop down list but
an interactive experience you can
work through at your own pace,
it keeps cognitive load more manageable.
And the other thing I would encourage
you to consider when it comes to your
calls to action, to think long and hard
about that post-click experience, right?
So let's take a classic example,
like an e-commerce site, right?
There is a lot that can still
go wrong when someone says,
I wanna buy this product, right?
So they hit buy now or
they hit add to cart, great, wonderful.
But if you look at statistics, the number
of people that drop out on a shopping
basket page or
a cart page is really, really high.
So we need to think carefully about that,
we need to think carefully about
the payment and checkout process.
Now, that isn't just e-commerce,
I'm talking about things
like bookings of a hotel or or
even submitting a contact us form.
Because it doesn't stop it just cart and
payment checkout process,
then there's the confirmation
email you receive.
That email where, yes,
someone's going to be in touch with you.
Or yes, we've got your order.
And then there's things like dispatch
emails, delivery tracking, delivery text.
All of these things are critical
parts of the experience.
And if you don't get them right,
the result is buyer's remorse.
The result is an unhappy client, which
will increase the number of returns and so
you snatch defeat from
the jaws of victory.
So this is where very much, you remember
I gave the airline examples where how
informing people and keeping people
informed is absolutely critical?
Pay as much attention to what happens
after someone clicks on that button, and
keeping them informed and keeping them
happy as you do, getting them signed up
in the first place, absolutely
critical part of the experience.
Because if you get that wrong, not only
are you gonna get more returns, you're
also gonna get more complaints, more
people badmouthing you on social media,
things like that, and
you can undermine the entire experience.
And in my mind,
this is one of the critical differences.
I know a lot of you guys are developers
and maybe you don't consider yourself
designers, but, this in my mind is one of
the critical difference between a user
interface designer and
a user experience designer.
We use those terms like they're
interchangeable, and they're really,
really not.
There's two very different disciplines,
and a user innterface designer
is interested in everything we talked
about up to this point, right.
The design, the layout,
all of that kind of stuff.
The user experience designer,
they care about the emails,
the dispatch notifications, the tracking,
and all of these other things that
together make up the experience that
decides whether someone is going to never
buy from you again or become a lifelong
customer that increases lifetime value.
So, yes, so that's all a little bit
about calls, so we've talked about calls
to action, we've talked about leading
users' attention, but I wanna kind
of finish this session by talking
about engaging users with aesthetics.